## This and That {#this}

Let's take another look at [extensible objects](#extensible). Here's a Queue:

    const Queue = () => {
      const queue = {
        array: [],
        head: 0,
        tail: -1,
        pushTail (value) {
          return queue.array[++queue.tail] = value
        },
        pullHead () {
          if (queue.tail >= queue.head) {
            const value = queue.array[queue.head];

            queue.array[queue.head] = undefined;
            queue.head += 1;
            return value
          }
        },
        isEmpty () {
          return queue.tail < queue.head;
        }
      };
      return queue
    };

    const queue = Queue();
    queue.pushTail('Hello');
    queue.pushTail('JavaScript');

Let's make a copy of our queue using `Object.assign`:

    const copyOfQueue = Object.assign({}, queue);

    queue !== copyOfQueue
      //=> true

Wait a second. We know that array values are references. So it probably copied a reference to the original array. Let's make a copy of the array as well:

    copyOfQueue.array = [];
    for (let i = 0; i < 2; ++i) {
      copyOfQueue.array[i] = queue.array[i]
    }

Now let's pull the head off the original:

    queue.pullHead()
      //=> 'Hello'

If we've copied everything properly, we should get the exact same result when we pull the head off the copy:

    copyOfQueue.pullHead()
      //=> 'JavaScript'

What!? Even though we carefully made a copy of the array to prevent aliasing, it seems that our two queues behave like aliases of each other. The problem is that while we've carefully copied our array and other elements over, *the closures all share the same environment*, and therefore the functions in `copyOfQueue` all operate on the first queue's private data, not on the copies.

A> This is a general issue with closures. Closures couple functions to environments, and that makes them very elegant in the small, and very handy for making opaque data structures. Alas, their strength in the small is their weakness in the large. When you're trying to make reusable components, this coupling is sometimes a hindrance.

Let's take an impossibly optimistic flight of fancy:

    const AmnesiacQueue = () =>
      ({
        array: [],
        head: 0,
        tail: -1,
        pushTail (myself, value) {
          return myself.array[myself.tail += 1] = value
        },
        pullHead (myself) {
          if (myself.tail >= myself.head) {
            let value = myself.array[myself.head];

            myself.array[myself.head] = void 0;
            myself.head += 1;
            return value
          }
        },
        isEmpty (myself) {
          return myself.tail < myself.head
        }
      });

    const queueWithAmnesia = AmnesiacQueue();

    queueWithAmnesia.pushTail(queueWithAmnesia, 'Hello');
    queueWithAmnesia.pushTail(queueWithAmnesia, 'JavaScript');
    queueWithAmnesia.pullHead(queueWithAmnesia)
      //=> "Hello"


The `AmnesiacQueue` makes queues with amnesia: They don't know who they are, so every time we invoke one of their functions, we have to tell them who they are. You can work out the implications for copying queues as a thought experiment: We don't have to worry about environments, because every function operates on the queue you pass in.

The killer drawback, of course, is making sure we are always passing the correct queue in every time we invoke a function. What to do?

### what's all `this`?

Any time we must do the same repetitive thing over and over and over again, we industrial humans try to build a machine to do it for us. JavaScript is one such machine. When we write a function expression using the compact method syntax (or use the `function` keyword instead of the fat arrow), and then invoke that function using `.` notation, JavaScript binds the "receiver" of a "method invocation" to the special name `this`.

Our `AmnesiacQueue` already uses compact method notation. So, we'll remove `myself` from the parameter list, and rename it to `this` within the body of each function:

    const BetterQueue = () =>
      ({
        array: [],
        head: 0,
        tail: -1,
        pushTail (value) {
          return this.array[this.tail += 1] = value
        },
        pullHead () {
          if (this.tail >= this.head) {
            let value = this.array[this.head];

            this.array[this.head] = undefined;
            this.head += 1;
            return value
          }
        },
        isEmpty () {
          return this.tail < this.head
        }
      });

Now we are relying on JavaScript to set the value of `this` whenever we invoke one of these functions using the `.` or `[` and `]` operators.

In other words, when we write:

    const betterQueue = BetterQueue();

    betterQueue.pushTail('Hello');
    betterQueue.pushTail('JavaScript');
    betterQueue.pullHead()

We expect that JavaScript will invoke the functions we've bound to `pushTail` and `pullHead`, and automatically bind `betterQueue` to the name `this` within them. And indeed it does: Every time you invoke a function that is a member of an object, JavaScript binds that object to the name `this` in the environment of the function just as if it was an argument.[^this]

Now, does this solve our original problem? Can we make copies of an object? Recall that the problem was that when we used a closure for private data, copying references to an object's functions meant that we were using functions that still referred to the original closure, and therefore shared the same private data.

Now our functions refer to members of the object, and use `this` to ensure  that they are referring to the object receiving a message. Let's see if this does, indeed, allow us to copy objects:

    const copyOfQueue = Object.assign({}, betterQueue)
    copyOfQueue.array = []
    for (let i = 0; i < 2; ++i) {
      copyOfQueue.array[i] = betterQueue.array[i]
    }

    betterQueue.pullHead()
      //=> 'Hello'

    copyOfQueue.pullHead()
      //=> 'Hello'

Presto, we now have a way to copy arrays. By getting rid of the closure and taking advantage of `this`, we have functions that are more easily portable between objects, and the code is simpler as well. **This is very important**. Being able to copy objects is an example of a larger concern: Being able to share functions between objects. That's how classes work. That's how extending objects works. Being able to share functions means being able to compose and reuse functionality.

There is more to `this` than we've discussed here. We'll explore things in more detail later, in [What Context Applies When We Call a Function?](#context).

T> Closures tightly couple functions to the environments where they are created limiting their flexibility. Using `this` alleviates the coupling. Copying objects is but one example of where that flexibility is needed.

[^this]: JavaScript also does other things with `this` as well, but this is all we care about right now.
