## Constructors and `new` {#new}

Let's strip a function down to the bare essentials:

    const Ur = function () {};

Or the equivalent:

    function Ur () {};

This doesn't look like it has anything to do with objects and constructing things: It doesn't have an expression that yields a Plain Old JavaScript Object when the function is applied. Yet, there is a way to make an object out of it. Behold the power of the `new` keyword:

    new Ur()
      //=> {}

We got an object back! What can we find out about this object?

    new Ur() === new Ur()
      //=> false

Every time we call `new` with a function and get an object back, we get a unique object. We could call these "Objects created with the `new` keyword," but this would be cumbersome. So we're going to call them *instances*. Instances of what? Instances of the function that creates them. So given `const i = new Ur()`, we say that `i` is an instance of `Ur`.

We also say that `Ur` is the *constructor* of `i`, and that `Ur` is a *constructor function*. Therefore, an instance is an object created by using the `new` keyword on a constructor function, and that function is the instance's constructor.

> An instance is an object created by using the `new` keyword on a constructor function, and that function is the instance's constructor.

### constructors, instances, and prototypes

There's more. Here's something you may not know about functions, every function has a `.prototype` property by default:

    Ur.prototype
      //=> {}

We remember [prototypes](#prototypes). What do we know about the prototype property of every function? Let's run our standard test:

    (function () {}).prototype === (function () {}).prototype
      //=> false

Every function is initialized with its own unique value for the `.prototype` property. What does it do? Is it related to the prototypes we saw with Metaobjects? Let's try something:

    Ur.prototype.language = 'JavaScript';

    const continent = new Ur();
      //=> {}
    continent.language
      //=> 'JavaScript'

That's very interesting! Instances seem to behave as if they *delegate* to their constructors prototype, just as if we'd created them using `Object.create(Ur.prototype)`.

We can actually test this directly:

    Ur.prototype.isPrototypeOf(continent)
      //=> true

And we can inspect the prototype of our `continent` directly:

    Object.getPrototypeOf(continent) === Ur.prototype
      //=> true

Let's try a few things:

    continent.language = 'CoffeeScript';
    continent
      //=> {language: 'CoffeeScript'}
    continent.language
      //=> 'CoffeeScript'
    Ur.prototype.language
      'JavaScript'

You can set elements of an instance, and they "override" the constructor's prototype, but they don't actually change the constructor's prototype. Let's make another instance and try something else.

    const another = new Ur();
      //=> {}
    another.language
      //=> 'JavaScript'

New instances don't acquire any changes made to other instances. Makes sense. And:

    Ur.prototype.language = 'Sumerian'
    another.language
      //=> 'Sumerian'

Even more interesting: Changing the constructor's prototype changes the behaviour of all of its instances. This *is* the prototype/delegation relationship we have already seen with `Object.create`.

Speaking of prototypes, here's something else that's very interesting:

    continent.constructor
      //=> [Function]

    continent.constructor === Ur
      //=> true

Every instance we create with `new` acquires a `constructor` element that is initialized to their constructor function. Objects we don't create with `new` still have a `constructor` element, it's a built-in function:

    {}.constructor
      //=> [Function: Object]

If that's true, what about prototypes? Do they have constructors?

    Ur.prototype.constructor
      //=> [Function]
    Ur.prototype.constructor === Ur
      //=> true

Very interesting!

### revisiting `this` idea of queues

Let's rewrite our Queue to use `new` and `.prototype`, using `this` and `Object.assign`:

    const Queue = function () {
      Object.assign(this, {
        array: [],
        head: 0,
        tail: -1
      })
    };

    Object.assign(Queue.prototype, {
      pushTail (value) {
        return this.array[this.tail += 1] = value
      },
      pullHead () {
        let value;

        if (!this.isEmpty()) {
          value = this.array[this.head]
          this.array[this.head] = void 0;
          this.head += 1;
          return value
        }
      },
      isEmpty () {
        return this.tail < this.head
      }
    });

You recall that when we first looked at `this`, we only covered the case where a function that belongs to an object is invoked. Now we see another case: When a function is invoked by the `new` operator, `this` is set to the new object being created. Thus, our code for `Queue` initializes the queue.

You can see why `this` is so handy in JavaScript: We wouldn't be able to define functions in the prototype that worked on the instance if JavaScript didn't give us an easy way to refer to the instance itself.

### how do constructors compare to `Object.create`?

Let's summarize what we know:

When we use the `new` keyword with a function, we *construct* an object. The function is called with its context (`this`) set to the new object, and the new object delegates behaviour to whatever object is in the function's `.prototype` property.

When we use `Object.create`, we create a new object and that object delegates its behaviour to whatever object we pass to `Object.create`. If we want to do any other initialization with the object, we can do that in a separate step.

Roughly speaking, we could use `Object.create` to emulate the obvious features of the `new` keyword. Let's try it. We'll start with `worksLikeNew`, a function that takes a constructor and some optional arguments, and acts like the `new` keyword:

    function worksLikeNew (constructor, ...args) {
      const instance = Object.create(constructor.prototype);

      instance.constructor = constructor;

      const result = constructor.apply(instance, args);

      return result === undefined ? instance : result;
    }

    function NamedContinent (name) {
      this.name = name;
    }
    NamedContinent.prototype.description = function () { return `A continent named "${this.name}"` };

    const na = worksLikeNew(NamedContinent, "North America");

    na.description()
      //=> A continent named "North America"

So do we *need* the `new` keyword, given that we can emulate it? Well, one could argue that we don't *need* multiplication for positive integers:

    const times = (a, b) =>
      a === 0
        ? 0
        : b + times(a-1, b);

Programming is a process of choosing and making abstractions, and combining constructor functions with the `new` keyword provides a single abstraction that handles several duties:

- The constructor's prototype provides a metaobject for describing the behaviour of every instance created with the constructor.
- The `.constructor` property of each instance provides an identifier for associating instances with constructors.
- The constructor's own code provides initialization for each instance.

We can do all these things with `Object.create`, but if we want to do exactly these things, and little else, `new` and a constructor function are easier, simpler, and familiar at a glance to other JavaScript programmers.

But when we want to do more, or different things, it might be better to use `Object.create` directly.
