## Why Metaobjects?

I> In computer science, a metaobject is an object that manipulates, creates, describes, or implements other objects (including itself). The object that the metaobject is about is called the base object. Some information that a metaobject might store is the base object's type, interface, class, methods, attributes, parse tree, etc.
I>
I> --[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaobject)

It is possible to write software using objects alone. When we need behaviour for an object, we can give it methods by binding functions to keys in the object:

    const sam = {
      firstName: 'Sam',
      lastName: 'Lowry',
      fullName () {
        return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
      },
      rename (first, last) {
        this.firstName = first;
        this.lastName = last;
        return this;
      }
    }

We call this a "naïve" object. It has state and behaviour, but it lacks division of responsibility between its state and its behaviour.

This lack of separation has two drawbacks. First, it intermingles properties that are part of the model domain (such as `firstName`), with methods (and possibly other properties, although none are shown here) that are part of the implementation domain. Second, when we needed to share common behaviour, we could have objects share common functions, but does it not scale: There's no sense of organization, no clustering of objects and functions that share a common responsibility.

Metaobjects solve the lack-of-separation problem by separating the domain-specific properties of objects from their implementation-specific properties and the functions that represent their behaviour.

The basic principle of the metaobject is that we separate the mechanics of behaviour from the domain properties of the base object. This has immediate engineering benefits, and it's also the foundation for designing programs with formal classes, expectations, and delegation.