## Mixins, Forwarding, and Delegation {#mixins}

The simplest possible metaobject in JavaScript is a *mixin*. Consider our naïve object:

~~~~~~~~
const sam = {
  firstName: 'Sam',
  lastName: 'Lowry',
  fullName () {
    return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
  },
  rename (first, last) {
    this.firstName = first;
    this.lastName = last;
    return this;
  }
}
~~~~~~~~

We can separate its domain properties from its behaviour:

~~~~~~~~
const sam = {
  firstName: 'Sam',
  lastName: 'Lowry'
};

const Person = {
  fullName () {
    return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
  },
  rename (first, last) {
    this.firstName = first;
    this.lastName = last;
    return this;
  }
};
~~~~~~~~

And use `Object.assign` to mix the behaviour in:

~~~~~~~~
Object.assign(sam, Person);

sam.rename
  //=> [Function]
~~~~~~~~

This allows us to separate the behaviour from the properties in our code.

Our `Person` object is a *mixin*, it provides functionality to be mixed into an object with a function like `Object.assign`. Using mixins does not require copying entire functions around, each object gets references to the functions in the mixin.

If we want to use the same behaviour with another object, we can do that:

~~~~~~~~

// ...

Object.assign(sam, Person);

const peck = {
  firstName: 'Sam',
  lastName: 'Peckinpah'
};

Object.assign(peck, Person);
~~~~~~~~

Thus, many objects can mix one object in.

Things get even better: One object can mix many objects in:

~~~~~~~~
const HasCareer = {
  career () {
    return this.chosenCareer;
  },
  setCareer (career) {
    this.chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  }
};

Object.assign(peck, Person);
Object.assign(peck, HasCareer);

peck.setCareer('Director');
~~~~~~~~

Since many objects can all mix the same object in, and since one object can mix many objects into itself, there is a *many-to-many* relationship between objects and mixins.

### scope and coupling

Consider a design that has four kinds of mixins, `Person`, `HasCareer`, `IsAuthor`, and `HasChildren`.

When you make a change to and one mixin, say `IsAuthor`, you obviously have to consider how that change will affect every object that mixes `IsAuthor` in.

By itself this is not completely revelatory: When objects interact with each other in the code, there are going to be dependencies between them, and you have to manage those dependencies.

But what you may not consider is that if *any* of the objects that mix `IsAuthor` in also mix in `HasChildren`, we have to think about whether `IsAuthor` conflicts with `HasChildren` in some way. For example, what if we have `IsAuthor` count the number of books with `this.number`?

Isn't it possible that `HasChildren` may already be using `.number` to count how many children a parent may have?

Normally, the scope of interaction between objects is limited because objects are designed to *encapsulate* their private state: If object `a` invokes a method `x()` on object `b`, we know that the scope of interaction between `a` and `b` is strictly limited to the method `x()`. We also know that any change in state it may create is strictly limited to the object `b`, because `x()` cannot reach back and touch `a`'s private state.

However, two methods `numberOfBooksWritten()` and `numberOfChildren()` on the same object are tightly coupled by default, because they both interact with all of the object's private state. And thus, any two mixins that are both mixed into the same object are similarly tightly coupled, because they each have full access to all of an object's private properties.

The technical term for metaobjects like mixins referring to an object's private properties is [open recursion][or]. It is powerful and flexible, in exactly the same sense that having objects refer to each other's internal properties is powerful and flexible.

[or]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_recursion#Open_recursion

And just as objects can encapsulate their own private state, so can mixins.

### mixins with private properties {#private-mixin}

Let's revisit our `HasCareer` mixin:

~~~~~~~~
const HasCareer = {
  career () {
    return this.chosenCareer;
  },
  setCareer (career) {
    this.chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  }
};
~~~~~~~~

`HasCareer` stores its private state in the object's `chosenCareer` property. As we've seen, that introduces coupling if any other method touches `chosenCareer`. What we'd like to do is make `chosenCareer` private. Specifically:

1. We wish to store a copy of `chosenCareer` for each object that uses the `HasCareer` mixin. Mark Twain is a writer, Sam Peckinpah is a director.
2. `chosenCareer` must not be a property of each `Person` object, because we don't want other methods accessing it and becoming coupled.

We have a few options. The very simplest, and most "native" to JavaScript, is to use a closure.

### privacy with closures

We'll write our own [functional mixin][fm]:

[fm]: https://javascriptweblog.wordpress.com/2011/05/31/a-fresh-look-at-javascript-mixins/

~~~~~~~~
function HasPrivateCareer (obj) {
  const chosenCareer;

  obj.career = function () {
    return chosenCareer;
  };
  obj.setCareer = function (career) {
    chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  };
  return obj;
}

HasPrivateCareer(peck);
~~~~~~~~

`chosenCareer` is a variable within the scope of the `HasCareer`, so the `career` and `setCareer` methods can both access it through lexical scope, but no other method can or ever will.

This approach works well for simple cases. It only works for named variables. We can't, for example, write a function that iterates through all of the private properties of this kind of functional mixin, because they aren't properties, they're variables. In the end, we have privacy, but we achieve it by not using properties at all.

And when we look at prototypes, we'll see this doesn't play well with prototypes.

### privacy with symbols {#privacy-with-symbols}

When we use a symbol as a property name, it is automatically unique and non-enumerable. It is still possible to discover its existance and retrieve its value, but it is not possible for two mixings to accidentally overwrite the same property.

We can write `HasCareer` like this:

~~~~~~~~
const HasCareer = (function () {
  const careerSymbol = Symbol();
  
  return {
    career () {
      return this[careerSymbol];
    },
    setCareer (career) {
      this[careerSymbol] = career;
      return this;
    }
  };
})();

Object.assign(peck, HasCareer);

peck
  .setCareer('Director')
  .career()
    //=> 'Director'
~~~~~~~~

Now our `career` abd `setCareer` methods refer to a property of `this`, but because we're using the value of `careerSymbol`, the property is unique and cannot be accidentally overwritten. Like working with closures, we must write our methods in a special way to make a "career" private.

Unlike using closures, we dont need to run a special function to mix our methods in, nor do we need to create new functions for each object we mix into. And we'll see later that this pattern plays well with prototypes.

### the "private mixin" pattern

Another way to achieve privacy in mixins is to write them as methods that operate on `this`, but sneakily make `this` refer to a different object. Here's a version of `Object.assign` tweaked for this purpose:

~~~~~~~~
function assignPrivately (receiver, mixin) {
  const privateProperty = Object.create(null);

  for (let methodName in mixin) {
    if (mixin.hasOwnProperty(methodName)) {
      receiver[methodName] = mixin[methodName].bind(privateProperty);
    };
  };
  return receiver;
};
~~~~~~~~

We don't need to embed variables and methods in our function, it creates one private variable (`privateProperty`), and then uses `.bind` to ensure that each method is bound to that variable instead of to the receiver object being extended with the mixin.

Now we can extend any object with any mixin, 'privately:'

~~~~~~~~
assignPrivately(twain, HasCareer);
twain.setCareer('Author');
twain.career()
  //=> 'Author'
~~~~~~~~

Has it modified `twain`'s properties?

~~~~~~~~
twain.chosenCareer
  //=> undefined
~~~~~~~~

No. `twain` has `.setCareer` and `.career` methods, but `.chosencareer` is a property of an object created when `twain` was privately extended, then bound to each method using [`.bind`][bind].

[allong.es]: http://allong.es
[bind]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Function/bind

The advantage of this approach over closures is that the mixin and the mechanism for mixing it in are separate: You just write the mixin's methods, you don't have to carefully ensure that they access private state through variables in a closure.

There is a flaw with this approach: Because we make `this` refer to another object, we can't ever refer to the original object. Let's take another look at `HasCareer`:

~~~~~~~~
const HasCareer = {
  career () {
    return this.chosenCareer;
  },
  setCareer (career) {
    this.chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  }
};
~~~~~~~~

You'll notice that `setCareer` returns `this`. That makes it easy to write things like this:

~~~~~~~~
Object.assign(twain, HasCareer);

twain
  .setCareer('Author');
  .career()
    //=> 'Author'
~~~~~~~~

But that won't work with `assignPrivately`, because `this` is bound to our `privateProperty` hidden object. So we end up returning `privateProperty` from `setCareer` instead of returning `twain`. Sometimes, that is fine, but it isn't really true that you can swap `assignPrivately` for `Object.assign` and get the same behaviour.

But the "private mixin" pattern still has its uses.

### another way to achieve privacy through objects

In our scheme above, we used `.bind` to create methods bound to a private object before mixing references to them into our object. There is another way to do it:

~~~~~~~~
function forward (receiver, metaobject, methods) {
  if (methods == null) {
    methods = Object.keys(metaobject).filter(function (methodName) {
      return typeof(metaobject[methodName]) == 'function';
    });
  }
  methods.forEach(function (methodName) {
    receiver[methodName] = function () {
      const result = metaobject[methodName].apply(metaobject, arguments);
      return result === metaobject ? this : result;
    };
  });

  return receiver;
};
~~~~~~~~

This function *forwards* methods to another object. Any other object, it could be a metaobject specifically designed to define behaviour, or it could be a domain object that has other responsibilities.

Dispensing with a lot of mixins, here is a very simple example example. We start with some kind of investment portfolio object that has a `netWorth` method:

~~~~~~~~
const portfolio = {
  _investments: [],
  addInvestment (investment) {
    this._investments.push(investment);
    return this;
  },
  netWorth () {
    return this._investments.reduce(
      function (acc, investment) {
        return acc + investment.value;
      },
      0
    );
  }
};
~~~~~~~~

And next we create an investor who has this portfolio of investments:

~~~~~~~~
const investor = {
  //...
}
~~~~~~~~

What if we want to make investments and to know an investor's net worth?

~~~~~~~~
forward(investor, portfolio);
~~~~~~~~

We're saying "Forward all requests for `addInvestment` and `netWorth` to the portfolio object."

### forwarding {#forwarding}

Forwarding is a relationship between an object that receives a method invocation receiver and a provider object. They may be peers. The provider may be contained by the consumer. Or perhaps the provider is a metaobject.

When forwarding, the provider object has its own state. There is no special binding of function contexts, instead the consumer object has its own methods that forward to the provider and return the result. Our `forward` function above handles all of that, iterating over the provider's properties and making forwarding methods in the consumer.

The key idea is that when forwarding, the provider object handles each method *in its own context*. This is very similar to the effect of our solution with `.bind` above, but not identical.

Because there is a forwarding method in the consumer object and a handling method in the provider, the two can be varied independently. Here's a snippet of our `forward` function from above:

~~~~~~~~
consumer[methodName] = function () {
  return metaobject[methodName].apply(metaobject, arguments);
}
~~~~~~~~

Each forwarding function invokes the method in the provider *by name*. So we can do this:

~~~~~~~~
portfolio.netWorth = function () {
  return "I'm actually bankrupt!";
}
~~~~~~~~

We're overwriting the method in the `portfolio` object, but not the forwarding function. So now, our `investor` object will forward invocations of `netWorth` to the new function, not the original. This is not how our `.bind` system worked above.

That makes sense from a "metaphor" perspective. With our `assignPrivately` function above, we are creating an object as a way of making private state, but we don't think of it as really being a first-class entity unto itself. We're mixing those specific methods into a consumer.

Another way to say this is that mixing in is "early bound," while forwarding is "late bound:" We'll look up the method when it's invoked.

### shared forwarding

The premise of a private mixin is that every time you mix the metaobject's behaviour into an object, you create a new, private object to hold the private state for the behaviour being mixed in. Thus, you can privately mix the same metaobject into many objects, and they each will have their own private state. When A and B both privately mix C in, objects A' and B' are created to hold private state for C, and thus A and B do not share state.

Forwarding does not work this way. When objects A and B both forward to C, the private state for C is held in C, and thus A and B share state. Sometimes this is what we want. but if it isn't, we must be very careful about using forwarding.

### summarizing what we know so far

So now we have three things: Mixing in a mixin; mixing in a mixin with private state for its methods ("Private Mixin"); and forwarding to a first-class object. And we've talked all around two questions:

1. Is the mixed-in method being early-bound? Or late-bound?
2. When a method is invoked on a receiving object, is it evaluated in the receiver's context? Or in the metaobject's state's context?

If we make a little table, each of those three things gets its own spot:

|                        |*Early-bound*|*Late-bound*|
|:-----------------------|:------------|:-----------|
|**Receiver's context**  |Mixin        |            |
|**Metaobject's context**|Private Mixin|Forwarding  |

So... What goes in the missing spot? What is late-bound, but evaluated in the receiver's context?

### delegation

Let's build it. Here's our `forward` function, modified to evaluate method invocation in the receiver's context:

~~~~~~~~
function delegate (receiver, metaobject, methods) {
  if (methods == null) {
    methods = Object.keys(metaobject).filter(function (methodName) {
      return typeof(metaobject[methodName]) == 'function';
    });
  }
  methods.forEach(function (methodName) {
    receiver[methodName] = function () {
      return metaobject[methodName].apply(receiver, arguments);
    };
  });

  return receiver;
};
~~~~~~~~

This new `delegate` function does exactly the same thing as the `forward` function, but the function that does the delegation looks like this:

~~~~~~~~
function () {
  return metaobject[methodName].apply(receiver, arguments);
}
~~~~~~~~

It uses the receiver as the context instead of the provider. This has all the same coupling implications that our mixins have, of course. And it layers in additional indirection. But unlike a mixin and like forwarding, the indirection gives us some late binding, allowing us to modify the metaobject's methods *after* we have delegated behaviour from a receiver to it.

### method proxies

With forwarding, we mix methods into the receiver that forward invocations to the metaobject. With delegation, we mix methods into the receiver that delegate invocations to the metaobject. These are called *method proxies*, because they are proxies for the methods that belong to the metaobject.

Mixins and private mixins use references to the metaobject's methods. Forwarding and delegation use proxies for the metaobject's methods.

### delegation vs. forwarding

Delegation and forwarding are both very similar. One metaphor that might help distinguish them is to think of receiving an email asking you to donate some money to a worthy charity.

* If you *forward* the email to a friend, and the friend donates money, the friend is donating their own money and getting their own tax receipt.
* If you *delegate* responding to your accountant, the accountant donates *your* money to the charity and you receive the tax receipt.

In both cases, the other entity does the work when you receive the email.

[fm]: https://javascriptweblog.wordpress.com/2011/05/31/a-fresh-look-at-javascript-mixins/