## Later Binding {#later-binding}

When comparing Mixins to Delegation, we noted that Mixins are early bound and Delegation is late bound. Let's be specific. Given:

~~~~~~~~
const Incrementor = {
  increment () {
    ++this._value;
    return this;
  },
  value (optionalValue) {
    if (optionalValue != null) {
      this._value = optionalValue;
    }
    return this._value;
  }
};

const counter = Object.assign({}, Incrementor);
~~~~~~~~

We are mixing `Incrementor` into `counter`. At some point later, we encounter:

~~~~~~~~
counter.value(42);
~~~~~~~~

What function handles the invocation of `.value`? because we mixed `Incrementor` into `counter`, it's the same function as `Incrementor.counter`. We don't look that up when `counter.value(42)` is evaluated, because that was bound to `counter.value` when we extended `counter`. This is early binding.

However, given:

~~~~~~~~
const counter = {};

delegate(counter, Incrementor);

// ...time passes...

counter.value(42);
~~~~~~~~

We again are most likely invoking `Incrementor.value`, but now we are determining this *at the time `counter.value(42)` is evaluated*. We bound the target of the delegation, `Incrementor`, to `counter`, but we are going to look the actual property of `Incrementor.value` up when it is invoked. This is late binding, and it is useful in that we can make some changes to `Incrementor` after the delegation has been set up, perhaps to add some logging.

It is very nice not to have to do things like this in a very specific order: When things have to be done in a specific order, they are *coupled in time*. Late binding is a decoupling technique.

### but wait, there's more

But we can get *even later than that*. Although the specific function is late bound, the target of the delegation, `Incrementor`, is early bound. We can late bind that too! Here's a variation on `delegate`:

~~~~~~~~
function delegateToOwn (receiver, propertyName, ...methods) {
  methods.forEach(function (methodName) {
    receiver[methodName] = function () {
      const metaobject = receiver[propertyName];
      return metaobject[methodName].apply(receiver, arguments);
    };
  });

  return receiver;
};
~~~~~~~~

This function sets things up so that an object can delegate to one of its own properties, instead of an arbitrary object. It's quite common for an object to forward methods to one of its own properties. In this manner, objects can be constructed using *composition*. 

Let's take another look at the investor example. Here's the `portfolio` we used before. modified to use the receiver's context like a mixin:

~~~~~~~~
const portfolio = (function () {
  const investmentsProperty = Symbol();
  
  return {
    addInvestment (investment) {
      this[investmentsProperty] || (this[investmentsProperty] = []);
      return this[investmentsProperty].push(investment);
    },
    netWorth () {
      this[investmentsProperty] || (this[investmentsProperty] = []);
      return this[investmentsProperty].reduce(
        function (acc, investment) {
          return acc + investment.value;
        },
        0
      );
    }
  };
})();
~~~~~~~~

Next we'll make that a property of our investor, and delegate to the `nestEgg` property by name, not the object itself:

~~~~~~~~
const investor = {
  nestEgg: portfolio
}

delegateToOwn(investor, 'nestEgg', 'addInvestment', 'netWorth');

investor.addInvestment({ type: "art", value: 1000000 })
investor.addInvestment({ type: "art", value: 2000000 })
investor.netWorth()
  //=> 3000000
~~~~~~~~

Our `investor` object delegates the `addInvestment` and `netWorth` methods to its own `nestEgg` property. So far, this is just like the `delegate` method above. But consider what happens if we decide to assign a new portfolio to our investor:

~~~~~~~~
const companyRetirementPlan = {
  netWorth () {
    return 1500000;
  }
}

investor.nestEgg = companyRetirementPlan;

investor.netWorth()
  //=> 1500000
~~~~~~~~

The `delegateToOwn` delegation now delegates to `companyRetirementPlan`, because it is bound to the property name, not to the original object. This seems questionable for portfolios--what happens to the old portfolio when you assign a new one?--but has tremendous application for modeling classes of behaviour that change dynamically.

### state machines {#state-machines}

A very common use case for this delegation is when building [finite state machines][ssm]. As described in the book [Understanding the Four Rules of Simple Design][4r] by Corey Haines, you *could* implement [Conway's Game of Life][gol] using `if` statements. Hand waving furiously over other parts of the system, you might get:

[ssm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine
[4r]: https://leanpub.com/4rulesofsimpledesign
[gol]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life

~~~~~~~~
const Universe = {
  // ...
  numberOfNeighbours (location) {
    // ...
  }
};

const thisGame = Object.assign({}, Universe);

const Cell = {
  alive () {
    return this._alive;
  },
  numberOfNeighbours () {
    return thisGame.numberOfNeighbours(this._location);
  },
  aliveInNextGeneration () {
    if (this.alive()) {
      return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
    }
    else {
      return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 2 || this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
    }
  }
};

const someCell = Object.assign({
  _alive: true,
  _location: {x: -15, y: 12}
}, Cell);
~~~~~~~~

One of the many insights from [Understanding the Four Rules of Simple Design][4r] is that this business of having an `if (alive())` in the middle of a method is a hint that cells are stateful.

We can extract this into a state machine using delegation to a property:

~~~~~~~~
const Alive = {
  alive () {
    return true;
  },
  aliveInNextGeneration () {
    return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
  }
};

const Dead = {
  alive () {
    return false;
  },
  aliveInNextGeneration () {
    return (this.numberOfNeighbours() === 2 || this.numberOfNeighbours() === 3);
  }
};

const FsmCell = {
  numberOfNeighbours () {
    return thisGame.numberOfNeighbours(this._location);
  }
}

delegateToOwn(Cell, '_state', ['alive', 'aliveInNextGeneration']);

const someFsmCell = Object.assign({
  _state: Alive,
  _location: {x: -15, y: 12}
}, FsmCell);
~~~~~~~~

`someFsmCell` delegates `alive` and `aliveInNextGeneration` to its `_state` property, and you can change its state with assignment:

~~~~~~~~
someFsmCell._state = Dead;
~~~~~~~~

In practice, states would be assigned en masse, but this demonstrates one of the simplest possible state machines. In the wild, most business objects are state machines, sometimes with multiple, loosely coupled states. Employees can be:

- In or out of the office;
- On probation, on contract, or permanent;
- Part time or full time.

Delegation to a property representing state takes advantage of late binding to break behaviour into smaller components that have cleanly defined responsibilities.

### late bound forwarding

The exact same technique can be used for forwarding to a property, and forwarding to a property can also be used for some kinds of state machines. Forwarding to a property has lower coupling than delegation, and is preferred where appropriate.