## Delegation via Prototypes {#prototypes}

At this point, we're discussed separating behaviour from object properties using metaobjects while avoiding discussion of prototypes. This is deliberate, because what we have achieved is developing a vocabulary for describing what a prototype is.

Let's review what we know so far:

~~~~~~~~
const Person = {
  fullName: function () {
    return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
  },
  rename: function (first, last) {
    this.firstName = first;
    this.lastName = last;
    return this;
  }
};
~~~~~~~~

So far, just like any other metaobject we'd use as a mixin, or perhaps with delegation.

~~~~~~~~
const sam = Object.create(Person);
sam
  //=> {}
~~~~~~~~

This is different. Instead of creating an object and then using `Object.assign` to incorporate behaviour from a metaobject, we're using `Object.create`, a built-in method that creates the object while simultaneously associating it with a prototype.

The methods `fullName` and `rename` do not appear in its string representation. We'll find out why in a moment.

~~~~~~~~
sam.fullName
  //=> [Function]
sam.rename
  //=> [Function]
sam.rename('Samuel', 'Ballard')
  //=> { firstName: 'Samuel', lastName: 'Ballard' }
sam.fullName()
  //=> 'Samuel Ballard'
~~~~~~~~

And yet, they appear to be properties of `sam`, and we can invoke them in the usual fashion. Furthermore, we can tell that when the methods are invoked, the current context is being set to the receive, `sam`: That's why invoking `rename` sets `sam.firstName` and `sam.lastName`.

So far this is almost identical to using a mixin or delegation, but not a private mixin or forwarding because methods are evaluated in `sam`'s scope. The only difference appears to be how `sam` is displayed in the console. We recall that the big difference between a mixin and delegation is whether the methods are early or late bound.

So, if we *change* a method in `Person`, then if prototypes are early bound, `sam`'s behaviour will not change. Whereas if methods are late bound, `sam`'s behaviour will change. Let's try it:

~~~~~~~~
Person.fullName = function () {
  return this.lastName + ', ' + this.firstName;
};

sam.fullName()
  //=> 'Ballard, Samuel'
~~~~~~~~

Aha! Prototypes have *delegation semantics*: They are late bound, and evaluated in the receiver's context. This is exactly why many programmers say that prototypes are a delegation mechanism.

We've already seen delegation implemented via *method proxies*. Now we see it implemented via prototypes.

### prototypes are strictly many-to-one.

Delegation is a many-to-many relationship. One object can directly delegate to more than one metaobject, and more than one object can directly delegate to the same metaobject. This is not the case with prototypes: `Object.create` only allows you to specific *one* prototype for an object you're creating. You can *change* the prototype of an Object with `Object.setprototypeOf`, but each object can onlyhave one prototype at a time.

### sharing prototypes

Several objects can share one prototype:

~~~~~~~~
const sam = Object.create(Person);
const saywhatagain = Object.create(Person);
~~~~~~~~

`sam` and `saywhatagain` both share the `Person` prototype, so they both share the `rename` and `fullName` methods. But they each have their own properties, so:

~~~~~~~~
sam.rename('Samuel', 'Ballard');
saywhatagain.rename('Samuel', 'Jackson');

sam.fullName()
  //=> 'Samuel Ballard'

saywhatagain.fullName()
  //=> 'Samuel Jackson'
~~~~~~~~

The limitation of this scheme becomes apparent when we consider behaviours that need to be composed. Given `Person`, `IsAuthor`, and `HasBooks`, if we have some people that are authors, some that have children, some that aren't authors and don't have children, and some authors that have children, prototypes cannot directly manage these behaviours without duplication.

### prototypes are open for extension

With forwarding and delegation, the body of the method being proxied is late-bound because it is looked up by name when the method is invoked. This differs from mixins, where the body of the method is early bound by reference at the time the metaobject is mixed in.

~~~~~~~~
const methodNames = (object) =>
  Object.keys(object).filter(key => typeof(object[key]) == 'function')
    
function delegate (receiver, metaobject, ...methods = methodNames(metaobject)) {
  methods.forEach(function (methodName) {
    receiver[methodName] = (...args) => metaobject[methodName].apply(receiver, args)
  });

  return receiver;
};

const lowry = {};
delegate(lowry, Person);
lowry.rename('Sam', 'Lowry');

Person.fullName = function () {
  return this.firstName[0] + '. ' + this.lastName;
};
lowry.fullName();
  //=> 'S. Lowry'
~~~~~~~~

Prototypes and delegation both allow you to change the body of a method after a metaobject has been bound to an object.

But what happens if we add an entirely new method to our metaobject?

~~~~~~~~
Person.surname = function () {
  return this.lastName;
}
~~~~~~~~

An object using our method proxies *does not* delegate the new method to its metaobject, because we never created a method proxy for `surname`:

~~~~~~~~
lowry.surname()
  //=> TypeError: Object #<Object> has no method 'surname'
~~~~~~~~

Whereas, an object using a prototype *does* delegate the new method to the prototype:

~~~~~~~~
sam.surname()
 //=> 'Ballard'
~~~~~~~~

Prototypes late bind the method bodies *and* they late bind the identities of the methods being delegated. So you can add and remove methods to a prototype, and the behaviour of all of the objects bound to that prototype will be changed.

We say that *prototypes are open for extension*, because you can extend their behaviour *after* creating objects with them. We say that *mixins are closed for extension*, because behaviour added to a mixin does not change any of the objects that have already incorporated it.

### summarizing

Prototypes are a special kind of delegation mechanism that is built into JavaScript. Delegating through prototypes is:

1. Late bound on method bodies, just like delegation through method proxies;
2. Late bound on the method identities, which is superior to delegation through method proxies;
3. Evaluated in the receiver's context, just like delegation.
4. Open for extension, unlike mixins, forwarding, and explicit delegation.

Prototypes are usually the first form of metaobject that many developers learn in JavaScript, and quite often the last.

### ...one more thing!

There is one more way that delegation via prototypes differs from delegation via method proxies, and it's very important. We recall from above that object delegating to a prototype appear differently in the console than objects delegating via method proxies:

~~~~~~~~
sam
  //=> { firstName: 'Samuel', lastName: 'Ballard' }

lowry
  //=>
    { fullName: [Function],
      rename: [Function],
      firstName: 'Sam',
      lastName: 'Lowry' }
~~~~~~~~

The reason is very simple: The code for representing an object in the console iterates over its "own" properties, properties that belong to the object itself and not its prototype. In the case of `sam`, those are `firstName` and `lastName`, but not `fullName` or `rename` because those are properties of the prototype.

Whereas in the case of `lowry`, `fullName` and `rename` are properties of `Person`, but there are also function proxies that are properties of the `lowry` object itself.

We can test this for ourselves using the `.hasOwnProperty` method:

~~~~~~~~
sam.hasOwnProperty('fullName');
  //=> false
lowry.hasOwnProperty('fullName');
  //=> true
~~~~~~~~

One of the goals of metaobjects is to separate domain properties (such as `firstName`) from behaviour (such as `.fullName()`). All of our metaobject techniques allow us to do that in our written code, but prototypes do this extremely effectively in the runtime structure of the objects themselves.

This is extremely useful.